[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I discovered that
to believe in humanity,
and to have the personal
decision that you will not let
evil and the misdoings of
others drag you down was very
fundamental.
Love is something extraordinary.
And we should pay more attention
to words like peace, hope,
faith, thankfulness, and so on.
>> Dr. Robert Muller
is a man of peace.
He labored behind the
scenes at the United Nations
for nearly 40 years before
his retirement in 1986.
A decade later in 1996, he
received the prestigious Albert
Schweitzer award for his
humanitarian efforts.
His unfailing energy in working
towards a world without borders
has earned him the
title of global citizen.
Robert George Muller
was born in 1923.
In his early years he lived
through political turmoil
in the Alsace-Lorraine
region of France.
Without moving, his
grandparents were
claimed as citizens of five
successive nationalities,
as this region was repeatedly
conquered, the result of three
major European wars.
As a child, he often
looked out the window
at a border he could not cross.
And dreamed of the day when he,
like the clouds and the birds,
would not have to be confined
by man-made divisions.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> During World War II Mr.
Muller experienced the horrors
of war.
First, as a member of
the French resistance,
where he endured
the Nazi occupation.
Then he suffered as
a prisoner of war.
And later, became a refugee.
When he finally
returned home, he
enrolled in the
University of Strasbourg,
earning a doctorate of law.
Then in 1948 he entered
an essay contest,
writing about how to
best govern the world.
He won first prize, an
internship at the newly created
United Nations.
For the next four decades Dr.
Muller met with world leaders,
looking at humanity from
a global perspective,
and envisioning ways to improve
life on the planet Earth.
He rose to the ranks at the
UN, and eventually became
an assistant to the
Secretary General.
Because of his optimistic
views about man's ability
to live in peace and
take care of the Earth,
he is known as the
"Prophet of Hope."
>> Dr. Muller, what a pleasure
and a privilege it is for me
to sit down and talk with you.
I thank you so much.
You have accomplished so much.
You have lived the life of three
men, as far as I'm concerned,
with all that you have
done in your life.
But the basis of all you
do and all you write about
is happiness.
Is that true?
>> That's correct.
>> Why happiness?
Why not ambition, or
drive, or dissatisfaction?
>> Well, I think it was a
perception I had as a child
already.
My father told me that
when I was a four-year-old
I was going around saying
that life was divine.
And I took this word
"divine," because it
was the biggest objective I
could find to give my view of
to be alive.
For me to be alive was something
absolutely extraordinary.
To see old people.
My father was surprised that
I took off my cap each time
there was an old man,
all the old ladies.
Why you do that?
Because they know so much.
And I hope that some
day I will know as
much as these old people know.
So for me, life was something
absolutely extraordinary.
And by having this
feeling towards life,
I felt that happiness
was almost a duty.
I was a happy child,
because all this around me
was an incredible miracle.
For me, happiness is still the
objective of the human being.
>> Do you think that people
can make a conscious decision
to become happy if
they are not happy?
>> Oh, definitely.
And this has happened to
me quite a number of times.
At one point the Germans stopped
me at the border, arrested me,
and we were in a Gestapo prison.
And we couldn't even lie down.
It was filled with people.
And you had a pail somewhere
for doing your necessities.
It was so awful I couldn't
imagine that something
like this could happen.
And then I said, how can I be
happy in a place like this?
That's impossible.
And I said, no.
I can decide to be happy.
But how would you do that?
It just happened that
I had a pencil, which
they didn't take off my coat.
And then I went
through the prison.
I also said, let
me go to the door.
And then I was
there at the door.
And with this pencil
I wrote a novel.
And I imagined that I was
living on a hill falling
in love with a beautiful girl,
and I was out of this prison.
I decided to be with
my mind elsewhere.
And as a result of this, I
was happy even in that prison.
They couldn't get my happiness.
>> People watching this
broadcast would say,
I like the idea.
I like the concept.
But I am unhappy.
I want to find happiness.
I have a dream that
I want to come true.
What's the first
step that person
takes to go in that direction?
>> I think there
would be two things.
The first one is to
remember your early youth.
What was your dream
when you were a child?
That gives you an idea
of what you can still do,
even if society has put
you into another direction.
And you can do it even
when you're very old,
when you're free,
when you are retired.
That's what I always
say to the old people.
Fulfill now the dream you
had when you were a child.
And once you see this, and
once you have your dream
and begin to work on it, then
you're immediately uplifted.
And you find the happiness.
And the funny thing is
that usually the dream
becomes fulfilled.
In my case, I was
dreaming as a kid
that the border which I saw
from my window disappeared.
And it disappeared.
>> So then dreams have power.
>> Dreams are some extraordinary
expansion of your capacities,
and what you could be able
to do if you do not see
the obstacles.
And when you dream then
there comes the idea.
The idea follows the dream.
Well, after having the dream,
this is what you can do.
Why don't you start with this?
So that the idea is a concrete
manifestation of the way
of fulfilling your dream.
And this is why I've written
all the thousands of ideas.
And if they do not come
into practice immediately,
it might be later.
It might even be
after your death.
>> Speaking of those
dreams, let's look at them.
Because I've read
some of your dreams
that you have written about.
And there are a couple
that I particularly love.
And I want to know how you
think they can come true.
This is from your book of "Ideas
and Dreams for a Better World."
Idea number 1,859.
You're right, Dr. Muller.
You do have quite a
few ideas and dreams.
"Wonder has been a
permanent part of my being
during my life.
In my elderly years it
has reached its maximum.
Have a sense of wonder for
your magical, divine life.
And for all the miracles
that surround you."
Talk to me about how we can
find wonder in our lives
if we don't have it.
>> Well, it's again a
creation of your being.
You see, maybe for a
long period of my life
I was not thinking
in terms of wonder.
As we talked about
before, I was dreaming.
I had a feeling of
the miracle of life.
And as I got older and
older, and wrote this,
I found another dimension
is the dimension of wonder.
It is that when
you wake up and you
look at the sky in
the morning, and you
see the forest in Costa Rica
being awaken under the sun,
this is almost a dream.
It is a miracle.
But what it does to
me as a human being
is a sense of wonder.
>> Would it help us, Dr.
Muller, if we asked the universe
or a power greater
than ourselves, or God,
show me a sense of wonder.
Give it to me so
that I may have it.
>> And you'll get it.
>> Then I'll get it.
OK.
Idea number 1,782.
"The word 'retirement
age' should be abolished,
and be replaced by a new
word like 'fulfillment age.'"
>> I even call it "refirement."
>> I like that.
>> Yes.
I cannot accept to
retire from anything.
And when I left the
United Nations I said now
I have total freedom.
And I am now 77 years old.
I've never felt so good.
I am free at the
University for Peace.
I work there for one dollar a
year so they cannot give me any
order.
I give my free services.
I am in Costa Rica in a
demilitarized country.
I can write, I can come up with
my dreams, I can make speeches.
I can walk in a
wonderful nature.
And this is not retirement.
In other words, even when I
was in the big United Nations
I was on top of the world.
But after leaving the United
Nations I didn't lose anything.
I found the whole nature of
Costa Rica, of the tropics
and so on.
So that with my leaving
the United Nations
I found even an expansion
of my own being.
>> Dr. Muller, I find you
to be a man who is so alive.
Are you at all afraid of dying?
>> I don't like
the idea of dying.
But first of all, by
taking this attitude
of having so much to do, so
many dreams, so many ideas,
you have no time to get sick.
And you have no time to get old.
So the idea of being
old is completely
excluded from my mind.
And I pray God to let me live
as long as possible in order
to do as much as possible.
And I live in such
a way to be healthy,
and not to take
any drugs, alcohol,
or things of this sort,
to sleep from 7 o'clock
in the evening and
nine hours every night,
because I go to bed at a time
when the roosters go to bed.
And then they wake me up
at 4:00 in the morning
so that I am in tune
with the nature.
And to live as long as possible.
>> Idea 1,902.
Every UN delegate, speaking,
should have before him a heart
stick like the
indigenous people have,
to remind them that they
should speak from the heart.
And you even say, "I
use such a stick."
Tell me about this stick and
how it would help the world.
>> It is to remind you
always that when you speak,
you must also speak
with the heart.
Because we Westerners will speak
mostly with the intelligence.
And very seldom do we dare
to use the word "love."
Recently, at the
University for Peace,
at the end of a course,
a girl student, when
I ended the course with a
speech as the chancellor,
she said, Mr. Muller, you do
not know how much I thank you.
Because I've taken this
three-months course and I've
never heard the word "love."
And in your final speech
you used it three times.
Can you imagine?
The distance between
the brain and the heart
is only 18 inches.
So you have to make a conduit
between the heart upstairs.
And the stick reminds you--
reminds indigenous people
never to forget the heart.
And our Western society
is too cerebral.
It doesn't speak enough of love.
We should speak about
love, happiness.
All these great concepts.
Forgiveness.
Compassion.
Taking care of people.
These are the great
concepts which
have always guided humanity.
And one thing which
is also important,
and which I remember
from youth, it
is to be in union
with the universe.
In other words, not only the
total planet and the total
humanity, but the universe.
And this I got,
again, as a child.
>> But what you're talking
about is a reverence for life.
>> Reverence for life.
>> Of course.
>> Exactly.
Absolutely.
>> Is what's happening
right now a dream?
>> Again, it's a dream that
I'm able to tell you this.
Because my dream
is that really what
I have learned from life,
these extraordinary lessons,
at the end of the 20th
century and the [INAUDIBLE],,
I would like to give
this to the world.
I would like to make the whole
world learn how to be happy,
and not to think negatively,
to think always optimistically
and positively.
Because optimistic
is always better,
even if it does not
succeed than pessimism.
>> Let me ask you this.
Give yourself a progress report.
How are you doing on your dream?
Your desire to teach
us, to teach the world
not to think negatively, to open
yourself to the cosmic forces.
How are you doing on
your mission, doctor?
>> Well, it's not yet very far.
But it is much better than
I could have ever expected.
If anyone would have told me
that the border in my home town
would disappear--
if anyone would have told
me that I would survive
all the Gestapos and
the Second World War,
where I could have been
killed a half a dozen times--
if anyone would have told me
that my dream to work for peace
would be fulfilled, and that
I would enter the United
Nations with an essay
immediately after the Second
World War-- and that three days
before retiring from the United
Nations I would be appointed
the Chancellor of a University
for Peace in a
demilitarized country.
>> Wow!
>> And that there are 34 Robert
Muller schools who are teaching
the children what
we are saying here.
To teach them happiness.
There's a Robert Muller school
which I visited in Texas.
And then the caretaker
in the courtyard
said, Mr. Muller,
I don't know what
they are teaching to
these children in there,
but I've never seen two
children fight each other.
How do they succeed this?
And I said for a
very simple reason.
Because on the day the
children come to the schools--
and the mothers already
tell them in their womb,
they are told that
they are a miracle.
And that they should be happy
to be alive when we know
so much about the universe.
More than any king
and emperor in time.
They should be proud
to be alive today.
And that they will
have a great--
they can have a
great role in life.
And then the children, they
say, well, if I'm a miracle
and he's a miracle how
can I hurt a miracle?
>> Then I would say that your
progress report is a pretty
good one.
>> Not bad.
>> But not good enough.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> During his four decades
at the United Nations, Dr.
Muller watched it grow from a
gathering of a mere 51 nations
to become a world authority.
He presided over early
efforts to conduct
a worldwide population count.
He projected birth rates,
and medical advances
that would increase longevity.
He warned of the
potential difficulties
to the biosphere with
uncontrolled population growth.
And then in 1972,
he presided over
the first worldwide
conference on the environment
held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
One of your great
accomplishments, Dr. Muller,
is more than 40 years of
service with the United Nations.
I think that's remarkable.
A lot of people today, though,
say that the UN is outdated,
and there is no longer
a need for that.
What are your thoughts on that?
>> Well, the United
Nations, in my opinion,
is really probably one of the
most important things that has
happened in this century.
When the World War II was
over and I joined the UN
I was a very
pessimistic young man.
If the French and the Germans--
two white highly
civilized countries--
had three wars in the lifetime
of my grandparents and parents,
how can I expect that communists
and capitalists, rich and poor,
to thousands of religions,
so many ethnic groups
and languages, that they
are going to make it?
I was almost sure
that within 20 years
there would be something
else that would trigger off
World War III.
And it hasn't happened.
When I go to New York
in the first United
Nations in an
abandoned war factory,
a Belgian delegate asked me,
what you're coming to do here,
young man?
I said, I come here
to work for peace,
because I do not
want my children
to see the horrors I
have seen in this war.
And he said, well, I pity you,
because you will lose your job.
This organization will not
last more than five years.
And the United Nations still
exists, has become universal.
It's the metabiological
organization
of the human species that
has to look into everything.
The outer space, the population,
the climate of the world,
the future population.
What will the world
be in 100 years?
In 1,000 years.
It is the biggest central
brain of the human species.
>> What if there was a
world symposium somewhere,
specifically about global
consciousness and spirituality?
Would people come to that?
>> Yes.
As a matter of fact, I have
created, with Dr. Karan Singh
of India, a World Commission
of Eminent Personalities
on Global Consciousness
and Spirituality.
>> Well, it's done then.
>> And we are going
to have a meeting,
which is planned now in Spain
in October of next year,
to bring together the most
eminent people from around
the world in order to
look precisely into this.
Namely to have the
consciousness of the universe,
the consciousness of
our planet, and to have
the religions to cooperate
in this global consciousness.
>> All right.
Create your dream.
Who would you like to be there?
>> Well, we will
invite presidents.
We'll invite the Dalai Lama.
We'll invite the Secretary
General of the UN.
We have some of the
best thinkers on Earth
who are perhaps
not so much known.
We will invite Ted Turner
and people like this
to really reach finally
this global consciousness
of the human species.
Beyond the nations.
>> Is that possible?
>> We have to do it.
Again, do not consider
anything impossible.
This is why I speak so much
about the world in my books,
and for 18 books so far.
And then my 4,000
ideas is always this.
You must love the
earth as your home.
>> You're a good teacher for me.
Because I, like many people
watching this broadcast,
might say sorry, Dr. Muller,
but that's impossible.
It's not just love everybody.
But I shouldn't say
it's impossible.
>> Never say that's impossible.
This planet is our home.
Look, in Europe we were able
to suppress for 15 borders.
Now Europe is the love
of all the Europeans.
And they fought
each other before.
Now the French and
the Germans are--
they're married, or can
settle anywhere in Europe.
You have a European
Court of Human Rights.
And it's a miracle that
you have transformed
countries which killed each
other for all these centuries.
Now they are Europeans.
>> All right.
Let me give you a
thought to consider.
You are a medical doctor.
The planet, Earth,
is your patient.
What's the prognosis?
>> Well, first of all, we have
a World Health Organization that
has all the works of the
doctors around the world.
I have recommended that we
should have an Earth Health
Organization.
>> An Earth Health--
>> Health Organization.
And that many people should
be the doctors of the Earth.
>> Excellent.
>> The healers of the earth.
The problems with the earth
are very, very serious.
We let every five
hours die a species.
Every five hours.
>> Really?
>> Every-- oh, yes.
Every minute we put 12,000 tons
of carbon dioxide into the air.
>> Let me get my head wrapped
around the species dying.
You mean like an eagle,
or a kind of a bird,
or a kind of a insect.
Every five hours one of
those species is gone?
>> Every five hours a complete
species on planet disappears.
>> Ugh.
>> Can you imagine?
When it took millions of
years to create that species.
>> I can't imagine it.
>> So there are now
six billion people.
In 1952 there were
two billion people.
In 2050-- in 50 years from now--
we will be three billion
more people on this planet.
>> Three billion?
>> Three billion.
Three billion.
That is half of the
world population of today
will be added to what we are.
We are six billion.
We are going to be 8.9
billion in the year 2050.
>> So then, doctor, the planet
Earth as your patient sounds
like it's sick and
getting sicker.
What do we do to heal it?
>> Well, we're making
a lot of noise.
I created the first world
environment conference.
I brought together the first
world conference on the climate
in 1979.
And they say, Muller is crazy.
And what do you see
in the newspapers?
That now governments
are trying to save
the climate of this planet.
You see, we have done everything
in the preceding period--
humanity, humanity,
humanity, humanity.
And we have succeeded.
The longevity has increased
from 40 to 60 years
in the poor countries.
to 72 years in
the United States.
The children's mortality
has almost collapsed,
has almost disappeared.
There are no world
epidemics anymore.
We have done wonders
for humanity.
But we totally forgot
about the earth
until in 1972 we discovered that
something was getting wrong,
and it was called
the environment.
We have destroyed 30% of
the nature of this planet
since 1970, and we
continue to do it.
Now, on the world
scale it is horrible.
The earth now has become
pre-occupation number one.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> So this is the
famous Bench of Dreams.
I know there's
one in Costa Rica.
>> Oh, yes.
And then more and more places.
>> All over the world there
are Benches of Dreams.
>> They are beginning
to spread, yes.
>> How did the idea come about?
Do you sit here and
dream up your dreams?
>> Well, here.
But also-- and
mostly in Costa Rica,
because we're located on a
sacred mountain, the legend
being of the indigenous people
that this is a land of dreams,
and that the dreams
will be come true
when you dreamed on sacred Mt.
Rasur.
>> Or on these benches.
>> Of course, on these benches.
>> So tell me how I would
dream a dream on this bench.
How do I make it come true?
>> Well, you take
two little rocks--
and there are some
available here--
you hold one in each hand.
>> One in each hand.
>> You hold them very, very
strongly with a lot of energy.
You close your eyes, and very
strongly you dream your dream.
And after a little while
you reopen your eyes.
And then you'll throw one of
the little pebbles on the earth,
so that Mother Earth will
help fulfill your dream.
>> OK.
>> And the other one you keep
at home on your desk to remember
what your dream is.
>> Bravo.
>> So this is my dream.
>> That is your dream.
>> Oh.
Robert Muller's idea
for a Bench of Dreams
originated in the lush
countryside of Costa Rica,
where he spends
half of his time.
The rustic Muller farmhouse
can be found near Mt.
Rasur in an area
considered sacred
by the indigenous people.
>> Your University for
Peace in Costa Rica,
what does one learn when
one goes there as a student?
What is the purpose?
>> Peace.
To teach peace in
every possible way,
and to teach also
peace with the earth.
So in other words, that
there are two main purposes.
Avoid violence-- how
to avoid violence,
how to teach the children
not to be violent,
how to get peace
between nations,
to get peace between everybody.
And the second one is to
have the right relationship
with nature, and not
to destroy nature.
Because when we destroy nature
it's a war against nature.
>> So there would be classes
like environment, one on one.
>> Oh, definitely.
Oh, definitely.
Definitely.
Now the students, they
have already a degree.
They have to have either a
master's degree or a PhD,
and they come from
around the world.
So that they get this additional
specialized teaching of helping
to have peace in the world.
And to create peace
ministries, and to have
peace education, whatever
you can in schools and so on.
>> And the students, after
they've graduated from
the Peace University in Costa
Rica, they go on to do what?
>> Well, they go into the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
They go into
various professions.
They go to a Peace
Corps, whatever.
That is up to them to find it,
but they have already an idea
before coming to the
University for Peace.
They have all
already an objective.
I want to go to the
University for Peace
because I want to work on peace
in the Ministry of Education,
for example.
Or I want to go
into politics, and I
want to become a
peacemaker in politics.
Or I want to return
to central Africa
to make peace between
the ethnic groups.
>> Do you have heroes?
Do you have people you
look at it and you say,
what a wondrous, wondrous
human being he is--
or she is.
Who are your heroes?
>> Well, I think a man
like Dag Hammarskjold,
who from being a tremendous
economist intellectual,
became a mystic in
the United Nations.
>> I agree.
>> Another man was
secretary-general, U Thant,
who was the Buddhist
mystic, who was very simple.
Very-- you cannot imagine
how simple he was.
Sometimes he said to me,
Robert, I cannot understand you
Westerners who go to the church
on Sunday to be spiritual
for an hour.
I am spiritual from the moment
I wake up until the evening when
I go to bed.
All my life is spirituality.
And I had to push him to
be strong as the Secretary
General.
And by the way,
speaking of dreams,
when I was appointed
to him people
told me, oh, he's only going
to stay two more years.
There's not much to expect.
And I said, but I'm
not going to lose
my time with a Secretary General
who is not audacious and so on.
So the first day
when we met I said,
do you have any
unfulfilled dreams?
He looked at me very surprised.
And he said, yes, I
have three dreams.
What are they?
I think that the United
Nations doesn't make sense
without China being here,
which is millions of people.
Secondly, I'm sick
and tired sometimes
to listen always to this
political and economic
speeches.
I would like to hear
a spiritual voice.
And thirdly, I would like--
I'm a teacher.
I think that without
teaching and education
we will have no peace.
So I would like to see maybe a
university for peace created.
And I said, OK.
Let's work on it.
First speech for him, return
of China to the United Nations.
Priority item number
one on the world agenda.
And China was voted
back to the UN.
And thank God to it,
because today we do not
have a Cold War with China.
>> Exactly.
>> Can you imagine?
Secondly, I said
to him, look, you
can ask the pope
to come and speak.
He's the head of a little
state-- the Vatican state.
We can invite the pope to come.
He said, OK, wonderful.
You invite the pope.
I invited the Pope John Paul II.
He came.
I go all the Cardinals
assembled in front of him
in their garments.
And it was a wonderful day.
They asked me--
the pope would like
to give you a gift at
the end of his visit
to the United Nations.
What would you like
to get from him?
And I said, well, I would like
to have a little crucifix--
very modest-- which
belong to himself.
And you know what he gave me?
This golden cross
which belonged to him.
That was the gift of the
pope for the invitation
to come to the United Nations.
>> The pope gave you this?
>> Gave me that cross.
You see?
>> Oh.
What a wonderful dream.
>> Can you imagine?
And then finally, I got the
University for Peace created.
By that time, unfortunately,
U Thant had left, and died.
But we fulfilled his dream.
>> Do you think that there would
be world peace if we all had
the same spiritual framework?
>> It would do enormously.
And it is now going
to happen at long
last, because the
religions have decided
to work together around the
concept of global spirituality.
Years ago, one of my first
books was called "New Genesis.
The Birth of a
Global Spirituality."
So that all the religions
would get together.
And I made a speech in the
World Parliament of Religions
in 1990.
So I said, for heaven's sake,
create a united religions
like the United Nations.
And Bishop Desmond Tutu,
the Nobel Prize winner,
listened to me.
And I said, then
don't wait another 100
years to have the next
Parliament of Religions.
And he convened it
in South Africa.
So that the Parliament
of Religions
can become the General
Assembly of the Religious.
And now they work together.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> One of the things that you
talk about is something called
"ka-put-alism".
>> [LAUGHING]
>> What on Earth is that?
>> Well, we have the word "dahs
kah-pi-tahl" of Karl Marx.
And of course, that
is [SPEAKING GERMAN]
because it is German.
And since I predicted capitalism
is now going to take the same
way as communism, namely it's
no longer an economic viable
system for the world, so
I call it "ka-put-alism"
because "kaput" means--
>> Gone.
>> So capitalism will be kaput.
>> It will be kaput.
>> OK!
What would happen if we in
the world simply smiled more?
If we made an effort
to smile more.
In interviews like
this, on the street.
What if we all smiled more?
>> It will be fantastic.
It will be fantastic,
because the face
reflects the whole philosophy.
And if you smile,
well, you are upwards.
You are optimistic.
If you are very
unhappy, even the body
sags to a certain point.
So that smiles and
the face speaks.
And I'm always
impressed by a man
who was the president of
Costa Rica, Rodrigo Carazo,
and who came to
the United Nations
to propose the creation of
the University for Peace.
And this man, he
smiles constantly.
I tried to imitate
him but I can't.
But it's always-- you
must will to smile.
>> Isn't that interesting?
The mere mention of
him makes me smile.
>> You see?
>> [INAUDIBLE]
>> The president of a
country who always smiles.
>> That's lovely.
That's lovely.
How would you say is
the best way for us
to educate children to think
of the world in this way?
>> To decide to educate them.
That is the first step.
If you decide to educate
the children in peace
you will have so many
examples and models.
>> One of the things that I see
that is so distressing to me--
something simple--
toys for children,
video games for children, where
they are nothing but violence.
Nothing but killing.
>> Well, I think that
this should be avoided
by the parents.
They can do a lot
already by the teachers.
And there are
countries like Sweden
where they have even agreement
with the toy manufacturers
not to produce any
war and violence toys.
>> Really?
>> Now can you imagine that in
Sweden the toy manufacturers
are producing peace
toys and never war toys?
>> No war toys?
>> No war toys
anymore whatsoever.
They don't produce them.
So in Sweden you
cannot buy a war toy.
>> Really?
>> Or a war game.
It is all peace games.
>> Even their video games?
No squirt guns?
Nothing?
>> Absolutely.
>> Astonishing.
>> And that was an agreement
between the government
and the Swedes.
>> How many times have you been
nominated for the Nobel Peace
Prize?
>> Oh, quite a few times.
Yes, quite a few.
Even by Nobel Prize winners.
And the nicest recommendation
for me as the Nobel Peace Prize
was from Betty
Williams, for what
I've done for the children.
>> Do you really not know?
Do you know it's about 19 times
that you've been nominated?
I didn't know.
Nobody told me this.
>> Yes.
>> You see again I come to
what I said at the beginning.
When you do something
positive some strange forces
begin to work in your direction.
And when you have dreams,
where you have ideas,
you are recompensed 10 times
by incredible happiness
and successes.
>> Do you know as I sit
here, enjoying immensely this
conversation with you, I'm very
aware of a phrase that you use
a lot.
You say, can you imagine?
And I realize that
is kind of a request
to go ahead and imagine it.
Because when we imagine
something what happens?
>> Absolutely.
Absolutely.
>> It occurs.
>> It's the first step.
It's the first step.
If you do not imagine
it will not happen.
I think this is the
value of the human being.
That he can imagine.
And then it becomes a reality.
>> Is your definition of
happiness different today than
it was 30 years ago?
>> I think it's the same,
but it's more expanded today.
I'm more optimistic
about a happy world
than I was when I came out
of the Second World War.
There's no doubt about it.
But we must keep in
mind that we have
completely new problems which
didn't exist at that time.
In the charter of
the United Nations
there's no word
"earth" or "nature."
That was not a
problem at the time.
>> That was what year?
>> That was in 1945.
By the way, we have
now the University
for Peace-- the
Earth Council, which
is located at the
University for Peace
has produced an Earth Charter.
So we have a United
Nations Charter,
and we have an Earth Charter,
where the earth is speaking.
And you will see in my
"Thousands of Ideas"
it's the Earth speaking
to me all the time.
Dear Robert, what do
they do this to me?
Whereas years ago, it
would have never have
occurred to me before 1972 even
to think so much for the Earth.
The earth was taken for granted.
>> One of the things that you
talk about that I actually
aspire to in your book
of "Ideas and Dreams,"
is the importance of
living more frugally--
in a more frugal way.
>> Oh yes, oh yes, oh yes.
>> Can you talk about
that a little bit for me?
>> That is absolutely essential.
Because a person in
the Western world
today consumes 30 times what
a person in a poor country
consumes.
Can you imagine?
And all the waste that goes
here in every direction.
One of the reasons why
the University for Peace
we have taken Saint
Francis as our Saint,
he has a beautiful
monument there--
it is because in
Saint Francis we
found the same ideals which we
have at University for Peace,
namely peace, respect,
and love for nature.
And simple and frugal living.
And for me, simple
and frugal living
is that it makes your
body function better.
And you are not
sold out to things.
>> But let's define
it a little bit.
Let's unpack a little bit.
Because people watching
this will say, well,
what does that mean?
We shouldn't go out--
>> It is not to waste
things as we do.
For example, to have cornflake--
to have something very easy
for breakfast in the morning.
Not hundreds of various,
various things around you.
I think everybody
knows what is is
to have a simple, frugal life.
And also, live more
generally in less things.
Even I myself, I have too
many things around myself.
And I refuse to live
in a modern house
on our mountain in Costa Rica.
It's an old peasant house
which I have restored.
And people say, why do
you live in this cabin?
Barbara, my wife, at
first she was shocked.
Today she doesn't want
to live anywhere else.
Because you can flood
a little dwelling,
a little cabin,
with all the love
of God and of the universe.
And the spirits
of the people who
lived there in the 19th
century, they are still around.
You can love something
which is very simple.
I prefer that simple cabin in
Costa Rica to a luxurious home.
So it's a kind of decision.
And I think the reason
of it is that you
want to be more yourself.
This is very, very important.
Inner self.
Here I have an anecdote,
which is important.
Not long ago there was a teacher
with a group of students.
And they said, oh, Mr. Muller,
what a wonderful nature
this university is located in.
And I said, yes, it is much
better than in a crowded city.
Here nature gives you
peace all the time.
You can look at this beautiful
nature without end, for hours.
Among my students
there is a girl--
a wonderful girl-- who
is always depressed.
Very, very unhappy.
I tried everything to make her
feel happy, and it didn't work.
And when she came
to this university
I said, let us not be inside.
Let us go outside in
the middle of nature.
Let's just sit down and look
at the beauty of nature.
And after a while I saw
that the girl was crying.
And I asked her,
what's happening?
Why do you cry?
She said, that's the first time
in my life that I found myself.
>> Can you imagine?
>> That is the first time in
my life that I found myself.
In nature.
>> You know, we're doing
a documentary on wisdom.
About silence.
And the power of silence.
>> The power of silence.
>> What are your
thoughts on silence?
What does silence bring to our
lives, from your perspective?
>> Well, the innermost--
you go inside.
I think the most important
thing is to go inside.
And then you can go outside.
You can give what
you feel inside.
For me, for my own
life, is you have also
to look-- what is your rhythm?
For example, my best moments
are very early in the morning
when I wake up.
And here I am lying in
my bed next to Barbara.
And for almost an hour the
ideas flood in total silence.
A whole new philosophy of things
I've never thought before.
And in the evening,
if you would ask me,
this would not be the same.
In the evening the world
has pressed me down.
I'm not at my best.
>> So it's the silence
that does that.
>> It is the silence
that does it.
And it is also the fact that you
had the night of recuperation.
I think it's important
for every human being
to find out what is
your best moment.
>> I'm at my best when I'm
around someone like you.
And I want to thank you
for this opportunity.
>> How kind of you.
>> I want to thank you
for a most incredible
and enlightening conversation.
Can I thank you for your time?
>> It was very nice.
Well, I'm going to
do one last thing.
>> Yes.
>> OK.
>> Are you going to read to me?
>> No, I'm going to
play you a little music.
>> [GASPS] Even better.
>> Because my grandfather
have taught me only one little
instrument.
It's a 10-hole harmonica.
And the greatest song in
my life, which I've found
is the "Ode to Joy" of
Beethoven and Schiller,
where all humans become
brothers and sisters.
So that I will
finish our interview,
whether you can use it
or not, with "The Ode
to Joy of Beethoven."
All right?
>> Can you imagine?
[HARMONICA SOUNDS]
>> You make me cry.
>> Me too.
>> Thank you.
>> I think a speech is
only successful if you cry,
and you make people cry.
I think this is when we
touch the great mysteries
of the universe.
>> Yeah.
>> I'm not ashamed in the middle
of the speech to begin to cry,
and to see people cry.
There's nothing wrong with it.
Thank you.
>> Thank you.
Thank you for my tears.
>> OK.
[MUSIC PLAYING]